We love spending time with people who want to do more in general for service
Being willing to serve others leads to a life full of blessings. In the late 1970s Linda and I were both assigned as
Special pioneers in Minnesota. That's who we first met. Then I was invited to Gillian
It was assigned to the Dominican Republic serving at the branch, and that's what we got married and Linda joined me there.
The Dominican Republic branch was still quite small in those years. So right after we got married our assigned room was the Bethel library.
And we were told this is the library so the door needs to be open until nine o'clock at night every night.
So that presented some unique challenges. And that really was a life lesson for us. You really need to keep a good sense of humor.
By nature, I'm pretty shy, but Dominicans are fun and open and very light-hearted.
That was a huge help to me because I learned a lot about how not to take things so seriously.
And I also learned things that we considered essentials were not essentials. You could live very happily with a lot less. And that was really good training for me.
So after being in the Dominican Republic for a few years, the work was moving forward.
There was a new branch under construction. It even looked like we were going to have the possibility of having a room with an ocean view.
But all of that was about to change.
It certainly was. In 1989, the Berlin Wall fell. And that started a ripple effect.
A lot of the small countries in Eastern Europe were starting to gain independence. And now they were able to have more religious freedom than they ever had before.
It was very interesting to us because Mike had family in Albania, which was one of those countries that had been under ban for many years.
We thought maybe it might be possible to visit Albania if it wasn't too dangerous for two or three days to meet the family and to reconnect.
It wasn't long after that that we unexpectedly got a letter from the governing body.
And the letter said, we understand you're going to Albania for two or three days.
We're wondering if you'd be willing to stay for two or three months and help with the kingdom work.
We were really sure with that meant, but we were willing to try.
The realities of the governing body had very limited information about what was happening in Albania.
The work was under ban. They didn't have a branch. They didn't have a congregation.
Maybe them didn't even know each other were still around.
They didn't know if we could find housing there. If we could find food, the country was in a total economic crisis.
Even with all the unknowns, we were still thrilled to go.
And we knew, well, it's going to be two or three months. And you can do pretty much anything for two or three months. We're going to give it our best shot.
Of course, once we arrived, we got a better picture. It was really happening.
The infrastructure had actually collapsed. People are scrambling to get a new government up and going. They was quite difficult.
But each assignment that we had prepared us for the next assignment.
Having lived in the Dominican Republic where there were already limited resources, it didn't make it as quite as scary.
It made that bridge a little easier for us to cross.
Some of the first things that we had to do was try to see if we could find the old brothers and sisters.
It was just a handful of them. And at the same time, we had to try to do what we could to meet with officials and see what could be done to help move the work forward legally.
In the process of trying to get the work legalized, unexpectedly we found out that a brother from the United States who had Albanian background was coming to visit his relatives.
And I said to him one day, tomorrow I have a meeting with the ministry who is responsible to give us legalization.
Would you like to come with me? Oh, I'd be delighted, he said.
So we go to the office. When we got to the office, the minister wasn't there, but he said to his legal advisor out.
And she made introductions. And then she looked at the brother and she said, were you from? And he said such and such a village.
And she said, that's my village. It turned out to be that they were cousins. Now she looked everybody and she said, my goodness, I was already willing to help you.
Because then it was never a charter that I've read that's better written than yours. But now I have a family obligation.
It was just a few days later we got a call and we had the document in our hands. Jehovah's Witnesses of Albania was finally legalized. The ban was lifted after 50 years.
After the work was legalized, we just saw Jehovah's Spirit work so mightily. Things were just moving forward in a way that we never expected.
They were flooding into the meetings, young people, older people. They were really hungry for the truth.
At the end of the three month assignment, the governing body kindly asked us, would you now be willing to stay since the work is legalized?
Well, at this point, those folks had become so dear to our hearts that there was no way that we could leave. We couldn't leave our family and we were thrilled to be able to stay with them.
We ended up serving in Albania just about 30 years and those 30 years went by very quickly.
We knew that a three day trip would turn into an assignment of a lifetime.
When you allow yourself to go outside your comfort zone, you learn a lot about yourself, but you're also more useful to Jehovah. You're also in a better position to help other people.
And that's an opportunity you never want to miss.
And really, never say no to an assignment just because we might be fearful of what the unknown is. When we put ourselves in Jehovah's hands, he's the one that will take on the responsibility to help us.
So, put them to the test. Let him help us. He knows where to put us at the right time. And in reality, we're just a pencil in Jehovah's hands letting him do the writing.